[Music]
the sun is rising
lighting up the trees swamps and massive
plants of the yucatan peninsula
it's 66 million years before today the
last days of the mesozoic era
this peaceful world doesn't yet know
that a rock the size of a mountain
is nearing earth at a speed of more than
40 thousand miles per hour
it looks like a fireball that's growing
larger and larger with every passing
minute
soon it already seems to be bigger than
the sun
dinos roaming the prehistoric earth
don't
know that they have to run hide save
themselves
not that it's going to help
the asteroid slams into the planet with
enormous force
it doesn't stop moving until it gets
through the crust to a depth of several
miles the impact leaves a crater that's
more than 100 miles across
thousands of cubic miles of solid rock
instantly turn into vapor
the crash sets off a series of natural
disasters
that erase 80 percent of life on earth
it's the very asteroid that's going to
finish off the dinosaurs
all the creatures close enough to see
the crash don't survive for longer than
a few seconds
so powerful the hit is closer to the
impact crater
the ground is covered with thousands of
feet of hot ash
grit and rubble
nine seconds later and everything for
many miles around
grass trees shrubbery bursts into flames
what isn't burned down within the next
several minutes after the collision
gets flooded in some places tsunami
waves reach a height of 1 000
feet earthquakes are starting to shake
earth like never before
their power is equivalent to all the
earthquakes that have happened on the
planet
in the past two centuries if they were
going off
simultaneously
a bit less than an hour after the
collision a gust of wind whips through
the area
at a speed of 600 miles per hour it
flattens down
everything that has been left standing
and scatters debris
for miles around a bit farther from the
direct impact zone
the skies start to darken dramatically
what looks like shooting stars
is actually debris raining back on the
planet
glowing ominous red they re-enter
earth's atmosphere
and emit infrared radiation during the
first hours after the crash
the sky is almost totally dark later
it starts to get lighter very very
slowly
for the next couple of years it's
something between a cloudy day
and twilight
lots of plants don't survive this
dimness and the absence of sunlight
the ash stays in the air for months
that's why when it rains
the water is highly acidic
fires keep raging they produce tons of
toxins
that destroy the ozone layer at least
for some time
earth is in for hard times
more than 30 000 objects that are
circling earth these days
can potentially strike our planet nasa
considers around 1 500 of them
potentially hazardous these space rocks
are the remains left
after the solar system was formed some
4.6 billion years ago
if one of these objects hits our planet
the consequences
will be unpredictable
they can vary from shattered glass and
broken windows
to all life forms getting wiped off the
face of the earth
unfortunately in our case it's likely to
be the second option
in 2004 astronomers discovered
a huge asteroid nearing earth
the first observations showed that the
chance of the space rock hitting
our planet was a bit less than 3 percent
the asteroid was named apophis it's more
than 1100 feet across
and weighs about 20 million tons it's
supposed to streak across the sky
exactly on friday april 13th 2029
apophis will pass at a distance of 19
000 miles away from earth's surface
scientists are almost positive that the
intruder won't collide with our planet
what's more they're super excited about
the possibility to see this space object
close up and not only them up to 2
billion
people will be able to watch the
asteroid pass with the naked eye
but even though this space rock might
miss our planet in 2029
it doesn't mean it won't return seven
years later in 2036
that's when life as we know it might no
longer exist
earth's gravitational pull is likely to
bring the asteroid
closer and when it comes back almost a
decade later
it's going to be on a closer collision
course
then what would happen if apophis or any
other asteroid its size crashed into our
planet
it would hurtle down to earth at a speed
of more than one thousand miles per hour
because of its huge size air friction
wouldn't be able to slow down the
invader
earth's crust would finally stop the
asteroid
the impact would turn into vapor not
only the space rock itself
but also a huge chunk of the planet's
crust
the collision would flatten even
reinforced concrete buildings
many miles away from the crater if the
asteroid landed in the ocean
the tidal waves would reach several
hundred feet
they would cleanly scrub nearby
coastlines
some debris would travel so fast they'd
leave the atmosphere
and start to orbit earth but most of the
rubble would reign
back to the planet this would be heating
the atmosphere
until it got as hot as an oven wildfires
would be spreading all over the world
anything not sheltered underground would
be cooked
in no time and then
for a year or even longer earth would
look the same as it did
after the asteroid hit it more than 60
million years ago
ash soot no sunlight a gloomy place
by the way in 2015 astronomers noticed a
1300 foot wide asteroid a mere three
weeks before it passed alarmingly close
to our planet
if its course had been a tiny bit
different people wouldn't have had any
time
to prevent the collision and save
themselves
does that mean that if a similar giant
headed toward earth
we would be doomed no worries
people would still have a chance to
survive for one thing
we could use a spacecraft to knock this
visitor from outer space
off its course or it could somehow be
blasted into pieces
scientists could also slow the thing
down with the help of concentrated
sunlight
or people could probably tug it away
with a gravity tractor
that's a theoretical spacecraft that can
influence
objects in space without touching them
in sci-fi movies a huge asteroid often
sneaks up on earth
and turns out to be a nasty surprise to
astronomers
it hurtles toward our planet at
breakneck speed and gets discovered just
weeks or even days before the collision
in reality scientists are constantly
watching
all more or less large objects in
earth's neighborhood
it means there would be plenty of time
to do something before the inevitable
happened
there are three kinds of missions
scientists could prepare
at short notice type zero
when a heavy spacecraft hurtles toward
the intruder with one single goal
to knock it off its course in this case
astronomers would have to rely
on the already available information the
type
1 mission would involve a scout it would
be launched first
to get more close-up information about
the space rock
only after that the main spacecraft
would be launched
with more precise information its
journey would be way more productive
and if scientists chose the type 2
mission
they would send a scout and a small
spacecraft at the same time
the spacecraft would knock the asteroid
a bit off its course
then the scout would collect all the
necessary information
based on this data the spacecraft would
finish its job
with a more fine-tuned second push
if none of these methods worked people
could try
going deep underground or even build a
shelter on the ocean floor
but in this case we'd need to find
sources of energy that could help us
survive for at least
several decades plus people would have
to create a life support system
that would somehow keep air and water
fresh
another option which doesn't look
realistic at the moment
is to go to space it can't be low earth
orbit
about 1200 miles above the planet's
surface debris
that would fly up at the impact could
easily reach this height
this would probably leave people with
two options
the moon or mars sadly
at the moment we have no idea how to
build a self-sustaining space colony
and there's not so much time left to
figure it out
you